---
title: 'Worship at COS'
summary: 'My thoughts during Trinity Sunday Worship'
published: '2021-05-30 12:00:00'
category: Spirituality
---
Most weeks for the past six years, I have been AT Christ Our Savior.  Today,
though, I am watching from home.  To keep myself from letting my mind wander,
I am keeping these notes.  I also am chatting with other worshipers.  It is true
that we can think about other things, and when we are not present in worship,
this is a stronger tendency.

### Announcements
Pastor Ely is doing the announcements.  He is recalling many of the veterans
who are and were members of Christ Our Savior.  Ely is asking for his prayers
on his call.

### Thoughts on Trinity Sunday
I've preached many Trinity Sundays. It is a celebration of a doctrine. The
Trinity is a self-defining teaching of the Christian church, and yet, the
Trinity is not ever spelled out in a single verse or passage of Scripture. So,
in a sense, the interpretive principle of looking at multiple passages and
drawing conclusions from their logical combination. This is perhaps not
immediately obvious.

### The Athanasian Creed
I remember reading somewhere that some scholars believe that the earliest uses
of this creed were chanted or sung, rather than spoken. It is an interesting
reflection of Christianity's dependence on its doctrine that it would sing
something like this.

Many people who read this creed look at the almost pedantic repetition of
"is" and "is not". For myself, though, the thing that stands out is that
the Athanasian, alone of the historic creeds, reviews and asserts the
conclusions from the Council of Chalcedon on the nature of Christ. Many people
say that they "believe in Jesus," but Christians have come to believe that you
must understand Him and who He is before that statement has much meaning.

### Children's Sermon:  Baptism
Pastor Ely went over the children he has baptized through the years and spoke
about how the Trinity is the central teaching of baptism as it is practiced.
It is a central part of the Lutheran life to remember baptism daily.

### Sermon

Ely begins by talking about how the Trinity cannot be explained. It is not a
matter of understanding, but faith. Indeed, while we use the word "trinity"
in popular culture as any group of three, the original word was _designed_ to be
nonsensical. It came from combining 3 and 1. And of course, two numbers were
different.

From this, Ely turns to the Gospel (John 3, the dialogue with Nicodemus) to
speak. He leads up to Nicodemus's question: "how can these things be?"  Ely then
turns to say that we, too, find things in Scripture that we find hard to
understand. In Nicodemus's case, Jesus is right there beside him physically, but
in our case, God is also with us, through His Spirit.

For myself, I wonder at Jesus' explanation to Nicodemus. Jesus points out that
the snake on the cross was a "type" of himself. We have learned, in the
succeeding centuries, that not everyone should just make types on their own.
There is no end of it. So I'll leave for another time the idea about how Jesus
can use something to explain Scripture that the church should now limit itself
to.

In John 3:16ff, Jesus shows not only _who God is_, but _what God does_. Pieces
of the Trinity are there, but also the action of the Father _loving_ the world,
and _giving_ His Son. Nicodemus responds to this doing. John shows Nicodemus
growing in faith. He does not appear in this chapter again, but he becomes a
special character later.

We do not need to understand God to have a relationship with Him. Like
Nicodemus, we do not need to "get" everything. This is an important point in
our "scientific" age, which refuses to accept anything without "proof". This
skepticism may serve us well sometimes, but it serves us well as we walk with
Him.
